LaJoy Johnson-Law spends hours in the car each day driving her daughter, Abria, from their home in Southeast D.C. to her school in Northwest.

It’s the only way she can get Abria to her special education class. While she’d do anything for her daughter, the distance wears on her, and it points to the inequities in the city’s education system. 

“People are tired of traveling across God’s good green countryside just to be able to get to certain programming,” said Johnson-Law, who’s also the Ward 8 representative to the State Board of Education. “We shouldn’t have to do all that. We should be able to go somewhere literally in Ward 8.”

That’s exactly the sort of thing she’s hoping the District’s next mayor can address. Local leaders have worked for years to reverse the historic disinvestment in wards 7 and 8 east of the Anacostia River, but substantive changes remain elusive. These neighborhoods still have some of the highest poverty rates and worst health outcomes in the city.

Wards 7 and 8 also tend to have the lowest voter turnout in local elections, so winning over their voters isn’t strategically critical for candidates (as compared to, say, Ward 3). But it’s nonetheless important symbolically for candidates to demonstrate they won’t forget about these neighborhoods, says former Ward 8 Councilmember LaRuby May.

“You have to care about the folks who need the most caring,” May said. “If you only care about the folks who need the least or who already have the most then that’s not the mark of a true leader.”

As the mayoral race hurtles toward the June primary, Ward 8 activist Markus Batchelor says his neighbors are torn. They’re eager for things to change, but still hesitant to totally upend a system that has delivered some progress in recent years. It’s a dynamic that maps neatly onto the pitches from the two leading candidates for mayor: the more progressive Ward 4 Councilmember Janeese Lewis George and more moderate former Councilmember Kenyan McDuffie.

“Folks are just trying to figure out which vision for the future is workable in an environment that seems very uncertain, but also very ripe for change,” Batchelor said. “But no matter who they’re for, I think everybody thinks that they’re investing in what they feel is a departure from the status quo.”

This divide is evident on an issue especially important in wards 7 and 8: how to bring more grocery stores to these communities. Every candidate agrees on the need to do so — there are only a handful of full-service stores located east of the river, forcing residents to make long journeys to other parts of the city or to the suburbs to find fresh food — but they’re pursuing sharply different approaches.


Ward 4 Councilmember Janeese Lewis George, center, greets supporters outside a mayoral forum in Anacostia.
Alex Koma / WAMU
At a debate in Ward 7 hosted by WUSA9, Lewis George said she’d explore opening a publicly owned grocery store, a strategy that’s gained attention after New York City Mayor Zohran Mamdani made the issue a centerpiece of his campaign last year. The District has offered generous subsidies to stores in the past, but never operated a store itself.

“A public-private partnership can work with the right investment dollars and the right support to make that happen,” Lewis George said.

McDuffie countered that such an approach is unrealistic. He pointed to the work he’s already done to help stand up a new store at the Skyland Town Center development in Ward 7 as the sort of practical approach that can get results, and said he worked closely with Ward 7 Councilmember Wendell Felder to ensure at least one grocery store is included as part of the development set to surround the new Washington Commanders stadium at the RFK campus.

“I want people to follow the facts and not just the rhetoric,” McDuffie said during the debate. “Look at the results that people have done since they’ve been elected.”

VJ Johnson, the head of the Hillcrest Civic Association, shares some of that skepticism. He believes Lewis George’s plans sound good, in theory. But he says the older, more moderate voters in his Ward 7 neighborhood fear they won’t come to fruition.

“One of the things that we struggle with is we want concrete, actionable, tangible steps,” said Johnson, who is backing McDuffie in the race. “We want to see what you’re trying to do so we can help you do it, so we know where you’re going with it.”


Former councilmember Kenyan McDuffie, left, speaks with backers ahead of a debate in Anacostia.
Alex Koma / WAMU
Yet Ward 7 activist Chioma Iwuoha believes voters east of the river are looking for inspiration. She points to Lewis George’s plan for massively expanding the city’s childcare programs as the sort of thing that will excite voters who struggle to pay bills.

“She’s not choosing to do the easy thing,” said Iwuoha, who supports Lewis George. “She’s willing to take the risk and she’s done the analysis to see what’s feasible.”

Many political observers believe McDuffie will win Ward 7; it’s dominated by the older Black homeowners that Johnson describes who are more likely to prefer his cautious approach. McDuffie also has roots in the ward, after buying his first home in Marshall Heights, and he also recently picked up Felder’s endorsement. 

Ward 8 is more of a toss-up. McDuffie has certainly built credibility there after working on several economic development projects in the ward during his time on the council. But the ward is also a bit younger, with more renters who could be attracted to Lewis George’s message, says longtime activist Philip Pannell. She’s put a particular emphasis on strengthening tenant protections and cracking down on negligent landlords, both areas of interest for residents living in substandard housing. 

“Janeese’s campaign has the most energetic ground game in Ward 8,” says Pannell, who is backing Lewis George. “I’m predicting that she’s going to win Ward 8.”

And Batchelor believes a third candidate could compete for votes east of the river as well: former councilmember Vincent Orange. Not only did he represent the nearby Ward 5 for years, but he also retains a base of support among seniors due to his long history in D.C. politics. Orange doesn’t have the financial strength of the other candidates, so he may not be able to win the race, but he could cut into the other vote shares.

Whoever emerges victorious won’t have time to waste in bringing resources to these communities, says Ward 7 activist Patricia Stamper, not with the RFK stadium development set to bring a wave of change to these neighborhoods. 

The development may be happening on the west bank of the Anacostia River, but city leaders are certainly hoping it draws new investment and construction projects to neighborhoods like Congress Heights and Anacostia. Stamper hopes the next mayor can find ways to connect residents to opportunities stemming from RFK without seeing them priced out of their homes. 

“We have a populace that has all this access and potential, but we need to turn that potential into a plan,” Stamper said. 

The Democratic primary is set for June 16.